---
title: "Haskell resources"
---

We will be using the Haskell programming language extensively in this course.
There are many free online resources for the Haskell language, and for this
reason, it isn't necessary for you to buy a Haskell book for this course unless
you really want to.

The best place to start is at the [Haskell Programming
Language](https://wiki.haskell.org/Haskell) wiki homepage at
[Haskell.org](https://haskell.org). There are links there for almost anything
you could want to know about Haskell. Be sure to check out the tutorials link
under "Learn Haskell" and, if you want to install Haskell on your own computer,
follow the Download Haskell link under "Use Haskell".

The standard Haskell environment, GHC, is free, and you can get it from the
Haskell website. GHC is a feature-rich environment, and it is fully supported by
the Haskell community; it is available, ready to install, for Linux, MacOS X
(10.6 or higher), and Windows. To run GHC on Linux, you type ghci at the command
line. You may encounter references to hugs (an older Haskell environment) in
some of the tutorials and other resources, but as far as I can tell, any command
that works in hugs works the same way in GHC. Both programs are installed on the
CSB|SJU Linux computers.

There are a whole bunch of tutorials available for Haskell, but unfortunately,
most of them are designed for people who are already experienced programmers. I
recommend you start with [Learn You a Haskell for Great
Good!](http://learnyouahaskell.com/) by Miran Lipovaƒça. If you like it, the
author encourages you to buy a print and/or e-book copy. The other tutorial you
may find especially helpful is the [Haskell Tutorial for C
Programmers](https://wiki.haskell.org/Haskell_Tutorial_for_C_Programmers) by
Eric Etheridge, although most of it may not make much sense until you begin to
get the hang of Haskell. If you try other tutorials, let me know what you think
of them, positive or negative.
